Russian

Russian is a Slavic language spoken throughout the former Soviet Union. It belongs to the East Slavic branch of the Slavic language family, which is the largest in the Indo-European group. Though Russian once served as a lingua franca for many different nationalities within the USSR, it is being increasingly supplanted by English in this capacity.

Здравствуйте (Zdrastvooityeh)
До свидания (Da svidahniya)


Turkish

Turkish is a member of the Turkic language family; in fact, it is the largest member of this group, comprising nearly 40% of the total speakers of all Turkic languages. Turkish displays a high degree of mutual intelligibility with Azerbaijani and Turkmen since all three are included in the Oghuz sub-family of Turkic. In terms of vocabulary, however, Turkish is somewhat unique, owing to the purging of Persian and Arabic loanwords from the language in the 1920s.

MErhaba
Güle güle (gOOleh gOOleh - said by person remaining) / Hoşçakalın (hOshchakalin - said by leaver)


Persian

Persian, like Russian, is an Indo-European language, though it belongs to the Iranian branch. It is spoken in three modern states - Iran, Afghanistan, and Tajikistan - where it is known as Farsi, Dari, and Tajik, respectively. Despite a handful lexical differences between the three languages, speakers of each can understand the other two without much difficulty, at least when spoken. The written forms differ significantly, as Farsi and Dari are both written in a modified Arabic script, while Tajik uses a version of Cyrillic invented by Soviet linguists in the 1930s.

سلام
Salam (salAHm)

خداحافظ
Khoda Khafez (hodAH hafEHz)


Azerbaijani

Azerbaijani, a close relative of Turkish, belongs to the Oghuz branch of the Turkic language family. It is spoken not only in the Republic of Azerbaijan, but also in Iran's northwestern Azarbaijan region. Azeris in Iran constitute nearly 16% of the total population, making Azerbaijani the second most-spoken language in the country. Aside from some vocabulary differences attributable to the political separation of Soviet and Iranian Azerbaijan, both varieties of Azerbaijani are essentially the same; additionally, both are 80-90% mutually intelligible with Turkish.

Salam (salAm)
Görüşənədək (gorushehnehdehk)


Georgian

Georgian is a South Caucasian, or Kartvelian, language, meaning it is completely unrelated to Indo-European or Turkic languages. It is written in its own script that dates from the 5th century AD. Georgian is not only the official language of the Republic of Georgia - it also serves as the literary language for all speakers of other Kartvelian languages in the area. In this way, it is similar to Standard German, which fulfills the same purpose for speakers of regional varieties of German like Swiss and Low German.

გამარჯობა (gAh-mahr-joh-bah)
ნახვამდის (nakh-vahm-dees)


Armenian

Like Russian and Persian, Armenian is an Indo-European language. However, unlike those languages, Armenian occupies its own branch of the Indo-European tree and has no known existing relatives. It is written in a script devised in the 5th century AD. One of the most interesting features of Armenian is that it has two standardized forms: Eastern and Western. The first of these is spoken in the Caucasus, principally in the Republic of Armenia, while the second is used in small pockets throughout the Middle East and by much of the worldwide Armenian diaspora. Within both dialects, there are further sub-dialects, some of which are not readily understandable by speakers of the other type of Armenian (i.e., Eastern or Western).

Բարև ձեզ (bah-REV DZEZ)
Ցտեսություն (tse-teh-soo-TYOON)


Chechen

Chechen is one of three languages in the Nakh branch of the Northeast Caucasian language family. Like all minority languages in Russia, it uses a modified Cyrillic script. Within Chechen, there are two subsets of dialects - those that belong to mountain dwellers in the south of Chechnya and those that are spoken by people living in the lowlands in the northern areas of the province. Chechen, having a large number of vowels (~44), is unique among Caucasian languages, which are famed for their seemingly interminable consonant clusters.

Ассаламу Iалайкум. (as-sa-lam-u `a-lay-kum ) 
Марша Iайла! (Marşa jayla!)


Ossetian

Despite its location straddling the border of Russia and Georgia, Ossetian is an Eastern Iranian language distantly related to Persian, though it is written in Cyrillic and belongs to an entirely different branch of the Iranian tree. Speakers of Ossetian are currently divided not only between two different provinces, but in fact between two completely separate countries - North Ossetia is a province of Russian, while South Ossetia is, at least nominally, a Georgian territory. The 2008 Russo-Georgian conflict saw Moscow take de facto control of the region, even going so far as to issue Russian passports to residents of South Ossetia. To this day, the province remains under Russian protection.

Салам. (sah-lam )
Фенынмæ. (fen-in-meh )


Laz

Laz, a member of the South Caucasian language group like Georgian, is spoken along the Black Sea littoral in northeastern Turkey and southwestern Georgia. Laz is distinctive among South Caucasian languages for being the only one spoken primarily in Turkey (as opposed to Georgia). Additionally, it has no written standard; Laz speakers in Turkey write the language using the Turkish alphabet, while Georgian Laz use the Georgian script. Even so, Laz is considered to be primarily a language of oral communication by most of its speakers, and they usually use the language of their country of origin for business or official matters.

Gegacginas / Xela do ǩaobate (გეგაჯგინას/ხელა დო კაობათე) – Hello


Avar

The Avar language belongs to the Avar-Andic subgroup of the North Caucasian language family. It uses a modified Cyrillic script and is spoken primarily in the Russian province of Dagestan, located on the western shores of the Caspian Sea. As Dagestan is the most ethnically heterogeneous region in Russia, Avar is actually only one of nearly thirty languages spoken in the area; however, it has managed to serve alongside Russian as a lingua franca for the peoples of central Dagestan. Despite this, Avar has been flagged by UNESCO as being in danger of extinction.

Hello!
ВорчIами! (to a man)
ЙорчIами! (to a woman)
РорчIами! (to several people)
wor-CHAH-mee!
yor-CHAH-mee!
ror-CHAH-mee!

Къо-мех лъикI! 	kkho-mekh hleek!


Abkhaz

Abkhaz is a Northwestern Caucasian language spoken in the Republic of Abkhazia, which is an unrecognized country located in northwestern Georgia. Unlike many other Caucasian languages, which had Cyrillic forced on them in the 1920s and 30s, Abkhaz has been using an adapted version of the script since the 1860s. In fact, Soviet authorities imposed the Georgian alphabet on the Abkhaz in 1928, a move that the Abkhaz were staunchly against, as they wanted to maintain an identity separate from that of the Georgians. Finally, in 1954, they were able to convince Moscow to reinstate the Cyrillic script and it has been in place ever since. In spite of their strong nationalistic tendencies, residents of Abkhazia actually tend to use Russian for most official business, relegating Abkhaz to informal and personal matters.

Бзиа збаша (Bzia zbaşa)
Бзиара убааит (Bziara ubaait) - m
Бзиара ббааит (Bziara bbaait) - f
Бзиара жәбааит (Bziara žəbaait) - pl

Абзиараз (Abziaraz)


Kurdish

Despite appearances to the contrary, Kurdish is not a single language, but a continuum of related languages belonging to the northwestern branch of the Iranian language family. The three subgroups of Kurdish - Northern, Central, and Southern - have very little mutual intelligibility, largely owing to the effect that neighboring languages, like Turkish or Arabic, have had on each. To make matters even more complicated, a number of Middle Eastern groups identifying as Kurds speak Zaza or Gorani, languages classified as separate from Kurdish. Kurdish uses the script of the country in which it is being spoken - Turkish in Turkey, Arabic in Iraq and Syria, and Persian in Iran.

Silav

Bi xatirê te (sg)
Oxir be (response)

4,300,000